---
title: "Ray 'Thunder Ray' McDonald"
permalink: /features/mcdonald.html
layout: about
---

# Ray "Thunder Ray" McDonald

When reviewing Black history at the University of Idaho, there is a certain difficulty in finding a pleura  of information regarding Black student organizations, the Black Cultural Center, or the Black Student Union.  Yet to say that it is difficult to find these histories, does not mean that they do not exist.  More readily than others, this history can be seen in the students that attended the university and the faculty that worked here.  Though they may just be individuals, their experiences here shaped and highlighted what Black progress at the University of Idaho looked like.  By recognizing what these key individuals did at the University, it gives credence to the honor they should be bestowed, especially during such an important time as Black History Month.  Remembering these individuals is an integral part of this month and an integral part of higher learning within the University of Idaho.  And there are many individuals that have come and gone, or who are still here that deserve recognition and praise for what they have accomplished.  One such individual that has gone somewhat under the radar in his significance at the university is Ray McDonald, a fullback for the University of Idaho from 1963-1966.

Ray McDonald was born in Dallas, Texas on May 7, 1944, to Andrew Wilson and Bessie Mae Walker McDonald.  He was raised in a neighborhood called McKinney, a segregated neighborhood that had become one of the larger Black suburbs in Texas at the time.  Though there is not much information about his early childhood, it was surely one of strife and challenge, especially growing up in the segregated city of Dallas.  He spent quite a few years in McKinney until his family moved to Alamogordo, New Mexico at the age of 14.  He attended his freshman and sophomore years of high school in Alamogordo until he again moved, this time to Caldwell, Idaho.  In Caldwell, Idaho he attended the Caldwell Idaho High School where he was a three-sport star for the Caldwell Cougars for the two years he was there.  He set records in football, basketball, and track and field at the high school and was certainly a rising star in the eyes of recruiters. He was an All-American At the time of his graduation in 1963, McDonald stood at 6' 2" and weighed 220 lbs, an impressive build that would prove beneficial for his time at the University of Idaho.
In 1963, with his graduation from Caldwell High School, he enrolled at the University of Idaho and registered for the mandatory freshman football team.  In this same year, his family also moved from Caldwell, Idaho to Lewiston, Idaho to be closer to their son.  His freshman football year was certainly a success for him as he helped lead the Vandals football team to convincing wins over Washington (32-18) and Washington State (36-0).  His Sophomore year of football was similar to his freshman year, though he did miss his first three games due to an Achilles tendon tear he suffered after playing a game of pick-up basketball in the summer.  This injury would play a major role throughout the rest of his football career that would come to impede his success.  McDonald really came to fame during his junior and senior years, where he led the Vandals to successful seasons and laid many records, some of which still stand today.  It was during these years that he would be nicknamed "Thunder Ray" and be an All-American for the 1965 and 1966 years for his incredible performance. 

In his collegiate career, he rushed for 2, 916 yards, with 1,329 of those yards coming from his last year alone, and 39 touchdowns-meaning he was averaging at least 100 yards rushing per game.  Ray's final game was a 255-yard game that still ranks fourth in the Idaho record book for most rushing yards in a single game.  In his last season, Ray averaged 132.9 yards per game, to this day a school record.  He carried the ball 259 times, which ranks second in school history.  On top of his incredible football performance, he was also a Big Sky champion in the shot-put and a two-time Big Sky champion in the discus.  Ray also ran the 120-yard hurdles and participated in the long jump.  On top of this, he was also a two-time All-American in track & field and was a national hurdler for the Vandals track team.  Many of his teammates from his years at the University of Idaho have had many great things to say about him such as Joe McCollum, a former Vandal wide receiver that friended McDonald earlier in his college years.  He said "He was a beautiful athlete, and on top of that, a beautiful person. There were very few Blacks up here at the time, but Idaho really embraced Ray."  Steve Burrato, a former Vandal offensive lineman and now a Canadian football coach, said that McDonald "..was more of a leader by example. He was such an extraordinary athlete he had the respect and admiration of everybody on the team."  Mike Monahan, a former quarterback for the Vandals football team, commented on McDonald's performance with his injury saying that "Ray never was able to truly show what he could've done because he limped the whole time he played, I don't suspect the doctors back then did a very good job. He led the nation in running and he limped."  It was clear that by his senior year at the University of Idaho, he had exceeded what was expected of him and had earned the respect and admiration of his teammates.  

Riding his collegiate career success and his graduation in 1966, he was drafted by the Washington Redskins in the first round in 1967.  However, his professional football career within the NFL was not as notable as his collegiate career, only playing a few games in his first season and one in his second season due to his Achilles tendon injury flaring up.  Another key incident that arose, which have led to speculations about his departure from the team was the question of his sexuality.  While he had not openly come out as gay, many of his teammates around him had come to assume so due to incidents around Washington D.C.  One of those incidents was his arrest in 1968 for having sex with a man in public, which led to aggravation from teammates and others.  A.D. Whitman Jr., a former running back for the Washington Redskins said that people would joke"...that he loved short yardage runs because he'd have hands all over him.  He was just a nice, innocent kid. I felt sorry for him because they took advantage of him in certain situations."  Eventually, his Achilles tendon injury, his sexuality, and a late appearance at a meeting with famed coach Lombardi, he was effectively out of the NFL in 1969.

With his football career over, McDonald decided to return to Dallas, where he worked small jobs here and there.  This was until he decided to further one of the passions he had since he was young - music.  McDonald had been a fond gospel singer and a talented pianist who had enjoyed recreating beautiful musical notes.  AS such, he decided to enroll at the University of Washington D.C. and Howard University to study music.  After his further college education at these universities, he became a music teacher at the Patricia Roberts Harris Educational Center in Washington D.C. (closed in 2009) and became the 'Minister of Music' at the Christ Holy Tabernacle in D.C.  From here, however, McDonald's life took a downfall as in 1986 he was stabbed by one of his lovers, puncturing his lung.  While in the hospital he was notified that he had contracted HIV, during the larger HIV epidemic of the 1980s and 1990s.  He had never notified his brothers about his sexuality and his sister-in-law even commented saying that 

"It was sad.  He couldn't be himself and be accepted. I think things would have been totally different for him if he could have been open.  It would have been better for him and the family. He wouldn't have had to move away."  The next seven years of his life were miserable for him as he was in and out of hospitals due to his disease.  By his last hospitalization in the Parkland Dallas Hospital, he had lost around 80 pounds of his NFL play weight (about 240 pounds).  He died on May 4, 1993, three days before his birthday of HIV-AIDS.

Though McDonald's life story is not the happiest one or even the longest one, he still had a big impact on those around him and the at the University of Idaho. 
